Data Analyst II (SQL)
Fidelis Care · New York, United States · 1 hour ago · 24 applicants
$52.9K/yr - $95.2K/yr  RemoteMatches your job preferences, workplace type is Remote.  Full-timeMatches your job preferences, job type is Full-time.
1,001-5,000 employees · Hospitals and Health Care
7 of 10 skills match your profile - you may be a good fit
View verifications related to this job post.View verifications related to this job post.
Show all
See how you compare to 24 applicants. Try Premium for $0

Apply

Save
Save Data Analyst II (SQL) at Fidelis Care
Share
Show more options
About the job
You could be the one who changes everything for our 28 million members. Centene is transforming the health of our communities, one person at a time. As a diversified, national organization, you’ll have access to competitive benefits including a fresh perspective on workplace flexibility.

Applicants for this job have the flexibility to work remote from home anywhere in the United States

Position Purpose Analyze integrated and extensive datasets to extract value, which directly impacts and influences business decisions. Work collaboratively with key business stakeholders to identify areas of value, develop solutions, and deliver insights to reduce overall cost of care for members and improve their clinical outcomes.

Interpret and analyze data from multiple sources including healthcare provider, member/patient, and third-party data
Support execution of large-scale projects with limited direction from leadership
Identify and perform root-cause analysis of data irregularities and present findings and proposed solutions to leadership and/or customers
Manage multiple, variable tasks and data review processes with limited supervision within targeted timelines
Support the design, testing, and implementation of process enhancements and identify opportunities for automation
Apply expertise in quantitative analysis, data mining, and the presentation of data to see beyond the numbers and understand how customers interact with analytic products
Support multiple functions and levels of the organization and effectively, both verbally and visually, communicate findings and insights to non-technical business partners
Independently engage with customers and business partners to gather requirements and validate results
Communicate and present data-driven insights and recommendations to both internal and external stakeholders, soliciting and incorporating feedback when required

Education/Experience Bachelor’s degree in business, economics, statistics, mathematics, actuarial science, public health, health informatics, healthcare administration, finance or related field or equivalent experience. 2+ years of experience working with large databases, data verification, and data management, or 1+ years IT experience. Healthcare analytics experience preferred. Working knowledge of SQL/query languages. Preferred knowledge of programmatic coding languages such as Python and R. Knowledge of statistical, analytical, or data mining techniques including basic data modeling, trend analysis, and root-cause analysis preferred. Preferred knowledge of modern business intelligence and visualization tools including Microsoft PowerBI. Experience with report/dashboard development, data/report automation, self-service capabilities, data design and integration, or data quality and governance preferred.

Pay Range $52,900.00 - $95,200.00 per year

Centene offers a comprehensive benefits package including competitive pay, health insurance, 401K and stock purchase plans, tuition reimbursement, paid time off plus holidays, and a flexible approach to work with remote, hybrid, field or office work schedules. Actual pay will be adjusted based on an individual's skills, experience, education, and other job-related factors permitted by law. Total compensation may also include additional forms of incentives.

Centene is an equal opportunity employer that is committed to diversity, and values the ways in which we are different. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability, veteran status, or other characteristic protected by applicable law.